Thank you. The topic of access to care  in VHA has been the focus of significant effort for the agency for 
about a decade.
This was a collosal effort that has taken on at various scales.
Firstly, Suffice to mention two legislation efforts; CHOICE Act 2014 and MISSION ACT of 2018, 
aiming to expand options for care for Veterans , are telling of the amount of effort that was 
invested in the issue.

These efforts were carried out at various scales, not only Congress but throughout the agency,
the estamblishement pf the office of community care and in the facilities who had to assign staff and resources to 
implement the language of the law.


From my perspective, implementation aside, it was an opportunity to think about how we understand the 
operation not only of community care
but project the problem access to care on a wider canvas -  if you will -
to understand the operation of outpatient referral in general.

In the following minutes I wish to present to you an idea  that has been the result of work  
in studying referral networks.



But before we get started - and to highligt the acuity of the matter at hand -  I wish to share two short published vignettes of 
Veterans that were 
referred to community care as their local VA  
could not accomodate him and how things turned out.

1.
34 yo , veteran with spinal cord injury sought mental health care from the VA after experiencing suicidal thoughts. 
He was told he could get an appointment with a VA therapist in six weeks, or he could go to a community care provider under 
the Mission Act.
He chose the latter option, hoping to get help sooner. 
However, he faced multiple delays and obstacles in getting his referral approved, finding a provider in his area, and scheduling 
an appointment. He ended up waiting more than three months to see a community care therapist². 
(Mission Act was to aid veterans' healthcare. The VA isn’t letting it.. https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2021/11/01/mission-act-aid-veterans-healthcare-va-isnt-letting-it/8561618002/.)



2.
A veteran with a spinal cord injury needed surgery to relieve his chronic pain and restore his mobility. 
His VA doctor recommended a procedure that was not available at his local VA hospital, 
so he was referred to a community care provider under the Mission Act. However, the VA did not pay the provider on time, 
and the veteran received a bill for $30,000. He had to contact his congressman and the media to get the VA to resolve the issue¹.
(Community Care - Community Care - Veterans Affairs. https://www.va.gov/COMMUNITYCARE/programs/veterans/General_Care.asp.)



Just as a reminder, the Mission ACT of 2018 expanded the options for Veterans to receive their care outside the VA.

What I described to you  is not new to anyone who had any exposure  to this topic as a VA official handling this piece, 
and can speak of the major challenges involved with the management of this program. 
Timely payments and scheduling  mentioned above are a case in point. Issues of documentation, quality assurance  and patient satisfaction 
or mitigation of complaints are another.

Indeed in the effort  to serve Veterans better we have encount
ered the law of 'un-expected consequences', and the market is disatisfied.
.
//
Here is a conflict of vision for you: Is the inability to accommodate a Veteran's care 
 an inherent attribute of our system?  
In other words an intractable problem, that regardless of the amount of funds we invest in it, will stay with us.  

Or is there a way to reason about this issue and set standrads to care delivery in ways not much  different  
than that of an engineer apparoaching a mechanical system, or an economist evaluating the financial or real estate market.

If we follow with the latter option, to continue this analogy borrowing from another field of study; 
That of Mechanics:
The laws of motion were successfully set by Sir Isaac Newton in the 17th century. 

These succinct system of rules of motion served humanity well, from launching rockets into space through 
designing surgical robotic arms. 
Unfortunately - at least for now -  we don’t  have such a framework  let alone  grounded in formal mathematical or numerical reasoning 
to describe healthcare delivery. 


I will start by trying to convince you that the notion that we cannot conceptualize healthcare delivery
 is false.
In the coming minutes I will engage you with the idea that there might indeed be such a formulation, 
it might not be as crisp as Newton laws of motion but it is none the less exists and it is useful. 
If  we use it, we are at least on a better footing at making learned decisions.

What we need is an abstraction of the outpatient referral machinery. 
Very complex problem, very complex  problem, indeed so many moving part, which disciplines refers to who, at what rates,  
and how fast or slow can these consult referrals be completed, 
some of our staff is only part time with VHA and the rest with the local university hospital …. 
I can go on like this for the next hour. So How do we reign in the mess.  OK.
//
//
But maybe we take simpler steps, like drawing a picture. Maybe that will be useful.
[ Slide 1: Lets start with  putting several clinical service on the paper, lets pick some big ones eh? -> Slide 1.1
So now we see primary care. Lets add a few more big hitters-> slide 1.2 
Add a few more still-> slide 1.3 ...Ok I think you got the idea here.

OK, now lets say that Primary Care refers a patient to Cardiology to Vascular Surgery. This is an everyday thing for sure. 
Lets add some more referrals. Podiatry and Mental Health. [Slide 2 shows the edges].  

Ok,I think you get the general idea of this toy example.
Lets take a look at this picture, this thing has a name: It’s a network, small but a true depiction of our reality, 
albeit simplified. 
//
// The next thing I want to show you is an example of a real VA network. This is really a bird's eye view of the whole outpatient
referral operation.
[Slide 5: full network of a healthcare system]
Ok, so far so good.  
.
//
//Believe it or not, the Lego car is subject to  many of the constraints that the real car. Modelling and simulation are common practice in engineering. We are now a step away from  doing exactly that with our  outpatient referral machine.

Ok, so we have the begining of a useful abstraction of the outpatient referral system. It’s a networks. 
Ok, in the next step  we are going to blow some life into this network. I need you to imagine how this networks comes to life. 
In every step, different services are firing consults at other service, which then goes into the queue at a certain rate, 
and are serviced at a  given rate. 
If the queue is too long, the clinic turns red.
To help us,
I made a little cartoon for you to watch how this works. 
Ok, so now we have not only an abstraction of an idea, we actually have a machine that somewhat resembles real life.  

Believe it or not, the Lego car is subject to  many of the constraints that the real car. Modelling and simulation are common practice in engineering. We are now a step away from  doing exactly that with our  outpatient referral machine.


//
OK, so we have the machine that can educate us on the mechanics of the outpatient referral world. I showed you a little  toy example of 
this machine. Now its time to scale this to a real VA healthcare system.

We  know the firing rate of consults.
We know the time it takes to service these requests.
We know the structure of the network.
We are interested in:
The over all number of patients in the queue, and the number clinic who are in the red i.e. the queue are too long, for which the
//
What I am showing you here is a tracing of a run from a healthcare system. Let's take a look.
So you see that this is not tangible over time. The queue, and number of clinics in the red "will blow up".

In the next slide will try to mitiaget this.

//
Notice the difference.

//Solution
What if for each clinic we can update their "time to completing the consult" throughout the simulation
 each time their queue gets too long.?
By the end of the simulation, will end up having a good estimate as to what needs to be  range of response times
given a rate of consultations. See what happends when we apply this idea at step 180
ul
//Last slide.
I hope I convinced you that the animal can be reigned in. The Benefits are clear, we keep Veterans in the system,
we dont farm them out, we maintain continutity of care.

I want to complete this presentation with some hubmle colucluding remarks:
I chose to quote a fine mind of this 20th century.  George Box, All models are bad some are useful. And this is the apparoach 
The outpatient operation is complex, it is  intractable to anyone who has veer dealt with this matter.
Models of system have been a useful idea for quite some time in engineering. Allowing to study behavior of multiple complex systems.
If I were successful at convincing you  this problem can be reigned in, , and you are convinced it is within VHAs grasp to do stage
this approach for the benefit of our Veterans, than we need to embrace  the study of complex systems in healthcare and bring it back into 
our workflows. I showed you a pathway forward.
We stand in a long line of men and women who served the US Gov't  for many years, meeting challenges is what we do. 
I believe we owe this to our Veterans, let alone the American people who trusts us.

