

Slide 0: Machine learning has been a solid topic in research and industry for at least 20 years,
some of the algorithms we are using today were around for
at least a decade. Scalable computing that ushered the term of Big Data/ cloud computing has also been around for at least a decade.
Recent develpment in hardware made it possible to realize  what was only envisioned on paper. 
These elements matured over the past few
years and has broken into the public realm of opinion on a scale in Nov 2022, when openAI came out with their langauge transformer
implementation otherwise known as ChatGPT. The rest is histroy. Asking what this technology can do for healthcare has been high on 
the mind of many large an small enterprises and in an extra-ordinary turn of events the regulator stepped very quickly into the picture
as we have heard from Mr Muller, and read in multiple other channels. Admittedly this is a complex topic to handle from many aspects, 
starting that speaking about machine learning is not trivial in our healthcare system let alone 
what is can do and what changes it many
effect.

What I want to do in the next 30 minutes or so is draw a equal part clear and feasible vision of what can be done in ML 
application for our 
organization, where we might needs some help and get to the finishing line without rolling over. 


slide 1:

I will strat by saying that the enterprise is endowed with a good amount of resources. Many are familiar with CDW for operation, 
many write SQL queries, have the option of projecting resultson PowerBI and share. Palantir arrived in VHA in 2020 around the time of
the vaccines, this is a very mature product to produce pipelines for data analysis, 

Slide 2:
That does not mean we do not have our problems, main the issue of skilled  staff. 10/2022, OPM came up with a new job series for data
scientists, allowed direct hire and yet the field is wanting.



slide 3:
Lastly, of note when I look at these points based on my experience, I think of managing the  what one would call the human factor, admittedly the salient 
factor in success of any project. Making the right selection for a project, devising the correct workflow, and then lastly, 
deployment, although we  now more options and things are getting better, and lastly managing the complexities of deployment failures
the pipeline.

slide 4
And yet I believe we have a path forward.  We heard and will contiue to hear a great deal on the language that governs what are the 
requirements that would satisfy ML deployment, I dont think that at this time humanity or the technology are ready for trusting predicitve
 modelling to make suggestions about clinical decision let alone critical one I believe the most advanced field are probably
  Radiology where a human-computer interface  has so far shown promise. Regardless, listening to the discussion I dont believe society 
  is ready to trust this technolgoy. With that said  I think there is still agood 
amount of room to do meaningful work in machine learning that is aiming at helping what I call admino-clinical work. 



slide 5:

Bicycle to the mind, this really speaks to scalability. The ability to use a machine t scale our ability to reason.
Machine learning can really do 3 things we need to bear in mind classify, predict and suggest a course of action given a set of rewards
or constraints.
WIth those in mind I wish to walk you through some ideas of feasible projects, some already realized.

Slide 6 
predict care in the community, this is actually something we did implement in NorCal circa 2022, in preparation for implementing 
the AIR commission recomendation, where NorCal took several counties from  from Palo Alto that grew the patient population base by som 20-25%.
The question was trying to predict the expectation of CITC services given patient count in a county.
This ws implemented using the Palantir data stores, I eventually had to move it out of Palantir fr the purpose of visualization, but 
this could have easily on palantir just the same. So if this look like LEAF to some of you in the audience

I mentioned  trying to think in scale, so I took this idea further and asked what is the expectation for f2f visits given 
a patient population size.

Again dont let  the seemingly straight line fool you, the axes have been transformed.
But again, we see that there is a clearly a pattern to this that can modelled and probably  useful for prediction.

What you saw here are collectively called scaling laws. 
This is an exmaple of using modelling to support decision making at an operational level, quite readily available to the enterprise with no 
need for any special machinery.

Slide 7: Care coordination

This is clearly a large topic on the minds of many. An the question is what can machine learning do for care coordination.
For that we need to come a bit closer and cast the questions in mind in the form whereby a machine can address them.
It starts with a better understanding of the problem.

I wish to briefly  walk you through an example and what it do for us. Again, the topic is consults, and the question is who consults who
in a large healthcare system. This is actually something we have just submitted for publication. We borrow the idea of a social network 
Which is a versatile data structure in computer science that has been useful for many.

So lets start with putting some clinics.
Lets create edges or links betwen them.
Lets have some more.

Lets add some color in life, we can denote the edges as a clinic with a specific overflow etc.

ok, So I think you got the general idea or this lets take a look at how a healthcare system.
I believe this is a good representation of a bird eye view of whats happening in the referrals across a given HCS.

we will return to it 

Slide 8: 
Looking for extreme patterms of referrals. This would be an after thought If we were in the financial or insurance business, this 
 question would be on everyones' mind really. The use/abuse of resources. 
borrowing ideas from cybersecurity and financial fraud, attempting to detect what we might call extreme transations. Machine learning can
  do great deal with this. If anything to ascertain the business is happening with in the expected variability. American tax payer
  is paying for this after all.

WHat you are going to look at was a finding that came up from using such analysis, that any untrained human eye can observe.
Machine learning can do much more.

This finding shows a good amount of traffic between MH and Community Care. 

Slide  9:
Clinical semantics as we understand it is mostly composed of text. Clearly there has been an effort to use codes to capture this
kind of semantics, but this effrot is only partly succesful especially because it is heavily reliant on the human factor.
What about those entities that dont have a code.?

So this is a relatively new thing from the past few weeks, We are currently gearing toward abstracting surgical complications that are hard to identify
and that have no ICD10 codes. I can speak to identifying etiology for surgical revision following TkAs. There is a code for 
Knee revision, but not the etiology that brought the patients into the OR.
I can speak with certainty that this can be done.
This could be done on existing  models and hardware, or options with specifically trained LLMs can be harnessed.




Slide 10:
Since I mentioned LLMs, this bring us to the next topic:
I want to move  to other applications, those that take advantage of LLMs, again supporting the clinico-admin staff.
This is something I implemented on my lap top after work, using a local LLM instal
I went ahead and used the VISTA documentation library documentation, which is freely available online, and built a simple AI agent that serves 
as a bot for a referencing question for CACs. Once deployed this could be a resource for many others across the country, 
It can further augmented by CAC notes and meeting and how tos CAC accrue over the years.
What  you are seeing here is a very skeletal version, through more work is needed  it is feasible on current machinery.

Slide 11:
I mentioned in brief that I used an AI-agent, these are software entities that leverage LLM to understand human language command, 
a set of tools they are equiped with and a memory to maintain the history and the context of the task.
So we have an entity that understands commands, equiped with tools and can reason on the outcomes of its work and tak further steps.
Now I want you to think about a group of such agent, or a crew of such agents tasked with carryong out a task.
This is the frontier  of where AI is today.


I want to take  moment and give credit to a friend and a colleague of mine called Dr Andrew Borkowski from VISN 8, who piqued my interest in Ai Agents 
and suggested we put a piece together on AI agents specifically its applictions in healthcare.  We most recently put it on a pre-print 
server for review and comments, this is where ou can find it for those of you who to dive deeper on what this technolgoy 
is about and what it can do for us. We will look for a place for it in the coming weekds.


Slide 12:

I wish to high light an interesting point. Mr Chuck Zeilman  CHIO for Tampa